the Ania gram of personality is a system
used by numerous mental health
professionals to get more insight into
one's character and as a method for
self-development the Ania gram consists
of nine personality archetypes that are
interconnected in different ways some
say that the Ania gram is liberating
compared to the conventional methodology
of mental health disorders because none
of the archetypes are inferior or
defective in themselves nevertheless as
it focuses as much on negative traits as
on positive traits it isn't an ego
flattering tool either the Ania gram
leaves room for overlap between and
within different personality types also
it acknowledges that nobody is purely
one type but rather a basic type that
transforms within its own range of
characteristics and also corresponds
with types that it's connected to this
video is an introduction to the anagram
of personality
[Music]
there's no consensus on the exact
origins of the Enneagram but it's
certain that the use and meaning of it
have changed throughout the centuries as
there are different interpretations and
usages by different people from several
time periods the Ania gram symbol
appears in the Islamic Sufi tradition
and variations of it are found in the
sacred geometry of the pythagoreans some
belief that Jewish neoplatonist
philosopher Philo brought the Ania gram
into esoteric Judaism and was later
represented in the Kabbalistic nine-fold
symbol The Tree of Life the Ania gram as
we know it today is based on the
teachings of the Bolivian psycho
spiritual teacher Oscar eachother and
the Chilean psychiatrist
Claudio Naranjo now Anka was influenced
by Russian mystic George Gurdjieff
who made the Ania Graham figure publicly
known and has possibly retrieved it from
a Sufi monastery in Afghanistan at the
end of the 19th century the word
Enneagram is derived from the Greek
words Ania and Hamas Ania means nine and
gamos means something that is drawn or
written and surprisingly the Ania Graham
of personality contains nine different
nodes each node refers to one archetype
the way in which the Ania Graham is set
up already shows the equivalence between
the archetypes none of the nodes is in a
preferable position as they are all
parts of the same circle the numbers
attributed to the nodes solely function
as a way to identify the archetypes but
are in no way a rating system meaning
that a seven isn't better than a two of
course there are differences in traits
but every type as positive as well as
negative traits which are all
significant in their own ways the level
of appreciation for each personality
type depends on personal and cultural
preferences and there's empirical
evidence that the archetypes play a
significant role when it comes to mate
selection the Ania Graham also
distinguishes the nine archetypes
through the manner in which they are
interconnected
for example they can be divided into
three groups meaning that these groups
consist of personalities that share
similar characteristics another example
is that every type is connected to at
least one type from another group this
signifies the potential of developing
characteristics that don't typically
manifest in one's personality type but
are present nonetheless be it in healthy
or unhealthy ways later on in the video
we'll explore this a bit further
so what archetypes does the Ania gram
present in this section of the video
we'll briefly explore the
characteristics of each archetype these
short descriptions are not complete but
they give a concise insight into each
type the first one is the perfectionist
a perfectionist wants to be right they
are driven to realize their ideal images
and with that they want to change the
world as it is into something better
they worship perfection and are
therefore burdened with the fear of
imperfection and can become quite angry
when things aren't the way they are
supposed to be norms and values are very
important to them and they can be quite
fault-finding
because of this perfectionists are
characterized by honesty reliability
productivity orderliness and discipline
but they can also be judgmental rigid /
fussy dominant and jealous therefore
developing patience is beneficial for
this archetype the second one is the
helper helpers want to be loved and
appreciated and shared their love and
appreciation with others even though
there cannot be enough solidarity in
this world helpers often use their love
as currency to buy appreciation and
affection but sometimes also to purchase
a sense of superiority and importance
and even power over other people thus
they could fall into the trap of
manipulation helpers are generally
caring warm friendly and generous but it
can also be manipulative possessive
dismissive of their own needs and often
act out of fear of being unloved
therefore developing true solidarity
instead of transactional love is
beneficial for this archetype the third
one is the achiever achievers want to be
successful how others see them is of
utmost importance they are prone to push
themselves to always be the best and are
allergic to failure even if their
behavior goes at the expense of other
people they run the risk to become
narcissists and fraud everything is
allowed as long as it prevents them to
experience what they fear the most
worthlessness achievers are
characterized by industriousness
confidence direction and high energy but
it can also be pretentious narcissistic
superficial and impatient therefore
developing truthfulness and authenticity
is beneficial for this archetype the
fourth one is the individualist
individual ists want to be unique they
dread the idea of being seen as
insignificant and ordinary they're often
artistic and their compassion and
emotional depth granted them the ability
to empathize with others however
deliberate separation from the herd
often leads to difficulties with
experiencing simple and mundane forms of
happiness that quote-unquote normal
people seem to experience so easily
individualist s' are characterized by
creativity expressiveness supportiveness
and warmth but they can also be
melancholic stubborn shy and envious of
other people's happiness therefore
developing equanimity in their emotional
world is beneficial for this archetype
the fifth one is the observer observers
want to acquire knowledge in which they
find understanding as well as safety
they crave independence and
self-preservation which also makes them
distant detached and closed off from the
world this is related to their fear of
being helpless and incapable of finding
their own way that they put emphasis on
being a self reliant as possible and
Trust mainly their thought observers are
characterized by objectivity sensitivity
analytical skills and conceptual
thinking
but they can also be emotionally distant
cynical greedy unassertive and
intellectually arrogant therefore the
development of the emotional world is
beneficial for this archetype the sixth
one is the loyalist
loyalists want to be dutiful being part
of something makes them feel safe and
they can be reliable participants within
a group the dark side of their behavior
is that it stems from a place of fear on
the one hand they seek guidance and the
one to belong somewhere and believe in
something or someone to ease their
anxiety on the other hand they are
suspicious of Authority this makes them
complacent in one situation and
rebellious in another loyalists are
generally caring thoughtful responsible
and of course loyal but it can also be
unpredictable dominant defensive and
paranoid
therefore the development of courage and
trust in oneself is beneficial for this
archetype the seventh one is the
enthusiast enthusiasts want to be
fulfilled they are commonly referred to
as the Epicureans among the other
personality types having fun engaging in
activities and seeking happiness are the
enthusiasts main objectives however
underneath the ongoing search for
gratification Heights of fear of being
unfulfilled because that would lead to a
possibly unpleasant confrontation with
themselves thus they often impulsively
jump from one pleasure to another to
stay out of negative thoughts and
emotions enthusiasts are characterized
by spontaneity a lively fantasy
curiosity and the ability to oversee
complex situations but they can also be
undisciplined impulsive manic confused
and narcissistic therefore coming to
terms with the reality of suffering as
well as a more thoughtful approach to
life are beneficial for this archetype
the eighth one is the Challenger
challengers want to be strong and
independent their lives revolve around
strength which means gaining strength as
well as using it to become a
self-sufficient as possible this desire
to be strong
comes from a fear of being violated and
controlled
needless to say challengers despise
being dependent and feeling weak even
though they have a strong and sometimes
aggressive demeanor in relationships
they are often very caring loyal and
generous challengers are characterized
by protectiveness high energy confidence
authority and directness but it can also
be rebellious insensitive vengeful
violent and domineering therefore
learning the value of being vulnerable
and the ability to let others lead are
beneficial for this archetype the ninth
one is the peacemaker peacemakers want
to be content in general there are nice
people and it's difficult to make them
angry they're accepting towards other
people consider it in their way of
speaking and dedicate it to achieve
peace among others as well as in
themselves the flip side is that
peacemakers tend to walk away from
conflict avoid pain and suffering and
likely suppress their own feelings and
needs thus their niceness often goes at
the expense of genuine expression which
could lead to self diminishment
peacemakers are characterized by
patience friendliness diplomacy and
empathy but they can also be unassertive
stubborn evasive and disengaged
therefore becoming more decisive and
vigorous is beneficial for this
archetype if one wants to use the
Enneagram for personal insight and
development the essential starting point
is the identification of one's basic
personality type from this insight it's
possible to further explore one's
personality and the interconnectedness
with other archetypes even though our
personality can be developed in
different ways and is therefore a
flexible entity we are not able to
change it completely according to the
Ania Graham Institute we cannot change
our core personality archetype as its
formation has been decided before birth
I quote everyone emerges from childhood
with one of the nine types dominating
their personality with inborn
Raymond and other prenatal factors being
the main determinant of our type this is
one area where most of the major and Nia
Graham authors agree we are born with a
dominant type subsequently this inborn
orientation largely determines the way
in which we learn to adapt to our early
childhood environment and quote we can
however alter our personality into a
healthy direction when we gain
sufficient insight and self-awareness
moreover in an ideal scenario we can
cultivate positive characteristics of
all nine types in order to achieve a
fully developed and individuate itself
aside from studying one's basic
archetypes features it's perhaps even
more interesting to investigate the
relationship between one's self and
other archetypes the structure of the
Ania Graham offers us several tools that
identify how we relate to other
personalities and how we manifest traits
from other types when we look at the
placement of the nodes we can see that
some are closer to each other and others
are not this isn't a random thing we can
divide the nine archetypes into three
groups also known as intelligence
centers which determine how we perceive
information the Ania Graham
distinguishes three centers the head the
body and the heart center also called
respectively the thinking action and
feeling center someone in the head
center approaches the world with logic
and reason and sees it mainly through
concepts and ideas someone in the body
center is strongly engaged with the
world and acts mainly based on intuition
and instinct and lastly someone in the
heart center relates to the world
through a deep connection with feelings
and emotions as with the archetypes each
Center isn't inherently good or bad but
they all have healthy and unhealthy
characteristics as the head the body and
the heart can be used and constructive
as well as destructive ways when we look
at the placement of the nodes on the
circle we see that every personality has
two wings for example type eight has
seven and nine as wings and type one has
nine and two as wings again this isn't a
random thing wing types are closely
related to one's basic archetype this
means that one is likely to possess
traits that actually belong to the wing
archetypes it depends on the individual
to what degree one has traits of their
wing types and which wing type is
dominant for example ones basic
personality type can be a six combined
with a strong five and a weaker 7 or
vice versa when we look at the lines
between the nodes we discover that each
archetype is connected to two other
types aside from their wings every
archetype has a healthy and unhealthy
connection with types that they are
connected to
therefore these connections are called
lines of integration and lines of this
integration the direction of integration
represents personal growth and healthy
self development the direction of this
integration represents how one acts when
experiencing stress when working with
the Ania Graham it's essential to
remember that people change constantly
and in different directions even though
a person is born as a certain archetype
he or she has the ability to develop
traits of all archetypes this change
isn't necessarily progressive or linear
healthy well-developed traits can
deteriorate and unhealthy traits can be
transformed into healthy ones by self
neglect or unfavorable circumstances one
can regress into the realm of
destructiveness but through
self-awareness and active engagement in
self-development one can become a
well-rounded individual the Ania gram
has gained popularity among mental
health professionals but has been a
target of criticism as well as some
people question its validity due to the
lack of scientific basis others accuse
the Ania gram of being too vague and
open to interpretation nevertheless it's
safe to say that your nia gram of
personality is an ingenious system that
has awakened the interest of mystics
philosophers psychologists and many
others throughout
the ages for many it has been a valuable
tool for self development which has
granted profound insights through a
philosophical lens there's much more to
be Enneagram than the basics presented
in this video for further learning
you'll find several links in the
description thank you for watching
[Music]